_drafts/2019-07-01-building-perf-tracking-with-appmaker.md, before:

---
title: "Building an employee performance tracking app with AppMaker"
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
  - Blog
  - Work
tags:
  - work
  - technology
  - Google
---

## Summary
Google's App Maker is a new tool to rapidly and easily build apps on Google's App Script platform. It provides an easy way to design web-based UIs, with many built-in components like tables and buttons styled in Gogole's Material Design language. At Maven Wave, our previous employee performance tracking sytem was spreadsheet-based and gorwing harder to  manage as the comapny expanded. A co-worker  suggusted the new App Maker tool could be used to streamline this process, and I jumped at the change to try it  out. 


We worked with HR and the Maven Wave partners to design a prototype, I built a proof of concept applicaton, and then other team built out the additional features needed to bring it to the wider organization in time for end of year performance reviews. The app was rolled out to our triple-digit US based team for the 2018 year.

## Processs

Commit message:

added content and cleaned up

_drafts/2019-07-01-building-perf-tracking-with-appmaker.md, after:

---
title: "Building an employee performance tracking app with AppMaker"
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
  - Blog
  - Work
tags:
  - work
  - technology
  - Google
---

## Summary
Google's App Maker is a new tool to rapidly and easily build apps on Google's App Script platform. It provides an easy way to design web-based UIs, with many built-in components like tables and buttons styled in Google's Material Design language. At Maven Wave, our previous employee performance tracking system - known as FUEL - was spreadsheet based and growing harder to  manage as the company grew. A co-worker  suggested the new App Maker tool could be used to streamline this process, and I jumped at the chance to try it  out and expand my skills. 

We worked with HR and the Maven Wave partners to design a prototype while I built a proof of concept application, and then more team members were brought in to built out the additional features needed to bring it to the wider organization in time for end of year performance reviews. The app was rolled out to our triple-digit US based team for the 2018 year.

## Designing the App
When App Maker was first released, a co-worker thought it would be a great fit to replace our employee performance review process. The process was spreadsheet-baed, and largely static: there wasn't much guidance on how to use it. We felt that App Maker was a great fit to rapidly prototype a better solution and learn more about App Maker at the same time. We began asking stakeholders and brainstorming what the data structures would look like.

After several weeks, we had more buy-in from stakeholders and the partners were interested in developing it as a full replacement for our existing process. Development began in earnest as we worked out exactly how the reviews would be conducted and how this would be communicated to the user.

## Building it out
After several months of meeting with  our UX, HR, and leadership teams, we finished the app. We kicked off the launch with a lunch session where we told user about the new system, how to use it, and showed them who to contact if they needed help or had feedback.

We got a lot of great feedback in the following weeks and added several features to the app to make the process more clear, and squashed several bugs.

## Going forward
As Maven Wave continued to experience explosive growth around the world, we made the tough decision to put development on hold and plan to replace it with an enterprise-grade performance management system that includes many other features we'll need as a rapidly growing company. Importantly, we'll take the lessons we learned from developing a real production-ready app with App Maker into future projects. 

It was not only an extremely valuable educational experience for the development team, but for the HR team as well, as the design and processes decisions made for the FUEL app are being used as we look for a read-made replacement. Being forced to redesign the whole performance process from start to finish helped leadership and HR align on their objectives and clarify what we valued most as a company.

## What did we learn?
* **AppMaker projects are best for tightly-scoped, desktop-centric apps that predominantly utilize G Suite data __or__ data that can be easily entered by a user into the browser.**
  * Tightly-scoped means it does one or two things well. AppMaker does not have any testing infrastructure, and replacing issues proved extremely difficult for us.
  * Most of the bugs we hit occured with complex custom components we had to write ourselves. Sticking to built-in objects whenever possible will save a development team time and headache.
* AppMaker is best for small datasets
  * AppMaker should not be used as a way to view or manipulate more than ~50 list or grid objects at a time as performance degrades quickly. It can store much more than this as the backend is just SQL, so it's fine to have a large dataset as long as a small amount of data is shown at once.
* While App Maker now has a mobile view option for pages, it's meant as a desktop __or__ mobile view - it's not responsive. Most App Maker components also seem more designed for desktops than mobile devices, but it will run just fine on mobile devices.
